What if Now Is? (2001)

The score for The Other Side of O (1998), Part 1 of dance trilogy Boom Boom Boom
choreographed, performed, and written by Deborah Hay

Program notes: Touch the tip of one index finger to the other. Do the same with your thumbs. With these fingertips connected, open the space between them, to form an O. Now separate your hands. What remains is the other side of O. This absence of boundary is the choreographed site for The Other Side of O.

Over the years, my attempts to identify harmony have been impaired by the complexity of my cultural background. After all, I grew up in the United States at a time when harmony was not a realistic measure of individual worth. Having spent my childhood in a Brooklyn Jewish ghetto in the forties, I became aware of the suppression and repression at work in the following decade, an era of so-called prosperity and social harmony. When the upheaval of sixties confronted this fiction, I was immersed in the New York art world, which was at the frontline of political and cultural struggle. At this time, harmony could well have been perceived by my generation as the byproduct of friction. Once the rebellion was spent and in some instances disbanded, the seventies reclaimed the idea of harmony through a retreat to nature and an increased preoccupation with self-awareness. During the eighties and nineties, the doggedness necessary to pursue my commitment to the field of dance did at times feel to me as some form of accord. In spite of these occasional brushes with harmony through my life, defining it has never been a concern in my choreographic work.

The subject of harmony as reflected upon by dancers and choreographers throughout this century, through flowing movement, phrasing, lighting, physical relationships, and costuming, often suggests an idealism that finds me embarrassed and fearful for dance as a serious art form.

However, a whole new light on the concept of harmony was cast while choreographing The Other Side of O. My meditation practice was what if now is here? (my feminist centennial response to the sixties teaching "Be Here Now", authored by Baba Ram Dass). This practice was meant to question my mental habits in regard to time and space, by proposing here as moment and now as place. A new question emerged out of this exercise; what if now is here is harmony? – i.e. what if I could consider notions of harmony through challenges to my sense of perceptual order by transposing time and space?

Here provided me with a strikingly vivid sense of location that included a constant repositioning of my body in relation to physical space. My body included a real and imagined presence of my history until now, and then now, and then now. Now was the immediate reading of juxtaposed experiences; a spectacle without motive or consequence. In this context, if here was temporal and now was personal, I had more than enough co-existing material to keep me decentralized and busy noticing how singularly theatrical and total each moment was. With no remaining time or space for an interpretation of harmony, what if now is here is harmony? became my back door approach to what I did not care to enter frontally.

What if now is here is harmony? is a self-perpetuating question that is continually applied to my perceptual field of activity while I perform the choreography of The Other Side of O.

I hate my costume. A red pouf hair ornament is arranged on my head and a gaudy red-jeweled ring in a bright gold setting is on the middle finger of my right hand. I never wear a ring. It makes all my fingers look stunted. I wear an oddly designed black jumpsuit with an attached pair of stiff organza pants that rise up and beyond the sides of my hips. A pair of flat crimson suede shoes turns my feet into spatulas. My ankles look weak. I steal a glance in the mirror and think, "O god. I look horrible, old, ugly, and idiotic," which is precisely what the choreographer hoped to achieve. The dancer and audience must see through the costume to see the dance. Then I leave the mirror, look down, empty my head and get quiet. Always ready, in costume for at least five minutes before anyone comes to get me, I stand and wait just inside the dressing room door.

The square-toed suede shoes directly approach the perimeter of a large imagined circle on the stage floor. With simple means I trace its border so the audience can also see it. The hollow clacking of leather soles becomes part of the circle making process. I make musical choices with these sounds. What if now is here is harmony?

Completing the circle I place my body in it, like a cook tasting again and again the combined flavors of new stew. The movements are a little off-track and offbeat, not exaggeratedly, but "just enough", which keeps me on my toes. I selectively alter the shape of my body and the apportioning of time and space within a shape so that the movements suggest, but fall short of association. I think that the alertness required of me alerts audiences likewise. They too are not quite able to determine where I am or where I might go next. From this movement away from material lodged in dance history, training, and culture, one movement starts to repeat, with clock-like regularity, and it repeats two, or up to nine times. A new movement surfaces and that repeats for a different number of repetitions. After the opening circle, The Other Side of O travels between two points, upstage right and downstage left. Fixed by the choreographer, it behooves the performer to conceal the linearity of this single diagonal unit. Travelling from upstage right to downstage left, I create a path that cannot read as a path, delighting in riddle-making. At the same time I am mediating these moments through my bodily responses to what if now is here is harmony? Waves of liberating energy flow within the confines of the choreographic structure. I feel generous, inviting being seen with few obvious connections to physical, social, cultural, and historical behavior. Some audiences may fear their inexpertness in seeing this as dance. Some learn to laugh at it. I adhere to the choreography, which gives me a sense of good conduct, refinement, and clarity. I feel generous where normally I describe myself as selfish. There is a difference between the performer and the same person who is not performing. The two entities may resemble each other but they are not the same.

Almost to the corner, I proceed to enact a single movement repeatedly. With each repetition my experience of it shifts. I perform the movement while turning in place, therefore what I see invariably alters. I note different body parts accentuated in the course of my many many repetitions – it may be the awareness of my wrist meeting space or the way my face is met by an audience member’s eyes, remembering what if now is here is harmony? I have a strong notion that the audience has noticed this unforeseeably fascinating bodiliness, including the sounds of my shoe soles hitting the floor. I inconspicuously slow down or speed up so that time appears stretched or shortened.

In the middle of the last repetition, I am out of it. The choreographer wants my return path so complex it cannot be recreated. What contributes more to complexity? Is it subtlety or the spatiality of a particular floor pattern or the spontaneous combinations of perky steps deemed necessary, by the choreographer, to cover space? At the end of each little combination I stand with my chest uplifted, rolling my head down, up, and back over my left shoulder. A new perky step combination then begins. However, like a batter with his bat, I am free not to accomplish the head roll the first time. I can return to the beginning of the movement, dropping my head down, before completing the full action. I get a kick out of this. I still want to get things right the first time. It’s nice having more than once chance. Ms. Glamorous toss-of-the-head, dressed in dowdy red flounce, ferociously penetrates her cultural taboos through her practice what if now is here is harmony?

My back is visible and crouched forward in the upstage corner. Whispers are issued as commands that I respond to with an assortment of small cries. Yet the cries and whispers are distilled into non-associative sounds before they leave my body. My crimson shoes’ leather heels and toes rapidly drum the floor. These three elements are spontaneously determined and rearranged as I return downstage obscuring the diagonal directive. Very tiny selective backward footsteps through an imagined restricted space slows the course of my action until my arrival, clear to me, is announced with a naturally spoken "boom."

To void the "boom" my left arm shoots diagonally upwards across my chest. My arm retracts by cocking the wrist, pulling it slightly to me, and saying "ah". My mouth stays open. There are innumerable options for closing it. I shift into a shiftlessness that hypothesizes not being anywhere long enough to experience being anywhere and here the stricture of the invisible diagonal pattern is finally broken. I cry aloud "waaaee", thrust my left palm forward, and remove the gesture instantly. Bob Rauschenberg once told me, "Never wait for anything."

My exit is my entrance. I leave stage,like a cook tasting again and again the combined flavors of new stew. The movements are a little offbeat, not exaggeratedly, but "just enough" which keeps me on my toes. I selectively alter the shape of my body and the apportioning of time and space within a shape so that the movements suggest, but fall short of association. I think that the alertness required of me alerts audiences likewise. They too are not quite able to determine where I am or where I might go next. At the same time I am mediating these moments through the bodily exercise what if now is here is harmony? as the light slowly fades.

The Match, 2004
Choreography and script by Deborah Hay

The Deborah Hay Dance Company's mission is to foster a discerning appreciation for the human body within the cultural construct of contemporary society, through dance as experienced by audience, student, and/or performer. Central to this mission is the role of humor in recognizing the wildly cogent dancer we are capable of exercising into action.

The goals of the DHDC are: to challenge judgments which limit how we identify the physical body in time and space, broadening the traditions of flow, beauty, and form that are currently prevalent in dance, and to expand the cultural concept of "dance" by defining the dancer as a site for inquiry, i.e. a bodily presence trained in the performance of parallel experiences of perception. An outline for advancing this project follows:

1) continue to introduce and explore through teaching and performing, how the cellular body, when invested with imaginative capability, can produce feelings of altering immediacy and gripping relatedness in the sensate body;

2) raise our standard of participating in a world beyond the subjective, where dance can become not just the site where movement and shape are produced, but a threshold where energies shift, multiply, and become visible;

3) expand the notion of choreography to include the conditions by which the choreographer transmits a dance to a performer, accounting for the many and often discontinuous threads within a visible and invisible context for beholding now.

4) In response to the rapid proliferation of digital technology and the dormancy of lived time, the DHDC is consolidating its effort to reclaim the human body as a value to be nurtured.

A "shard of a niche."

In April, 1999, Deborah attended a meeting steered by Nello McDaniel and George Thorn of Arts Action Research, who work with professional arts organizations on (a) planning, (b) clarity and articulation of vision/mission and direction, (c) organizational structure, (d) human resource development, and (e) transitional issues. Their presence in Austin was at the invitation of Lisa Fehrman, a dancer, choreographer, and the director of Stillpoint Dance Company.

The concept that made Deborah's mouth drop open was what Nello described as a new entrepreneurial term, shard-of-niche. It used to be that a business described its niche. The Arts Action Research team requested that each arts organization at this meeting answer a few questions in order to help determine its shard-of-a-niche. The DHDC decided to publish its responses as a way to update its commitment to our work and community.

Describe the historical context in which the DHDC exists:

In 1960, at the age of 19, Deborah Hay moved from Brooklyn into Manhattan. Her choreographic work developed in the midst of the most radical cultural revolution in the United States. Hay soon became one of the central figures in the Judson Dance Theatre, a community of artists whose work challenged the prevailing canon of modern choreography, from who dances to the very notion of what constitutes a dance. Out of these explorations, fabulous collaborations occurred between visual artists and dance artists. Their works were primarily showcased at Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village, in art galleries, and museums. It is in this context that Hay collaborated with artist Robert Rauschenberg, which then led to her participation in the Merce Cunningham Dance Company during a six-month world tour in 1964. As the most radical trends in the NYC art scene moved in new directions, Hay, unlike many of her peers, left Manhattan to settle in Vermont, where she lived in a community for six and a half years. It was during those prolonged periods of quiet rural life, that the foundation of her current work was laid.

Following the noisy vanguard years in NYC, Hay's experience of Vermont's day to day stillness synthesized her ideas into a minimal concept of dance, ethically and aesthetically grounded on the principle that less is more. To this day she makes dances without a linear construct to achieve. She creates conditions for a direct experience of all kinds of phenomena. She locates in those phenomena the interpretive keys to the performance and understanding of each dance. Her faith in this process, now in its 30th year, is the innermost raison d'etre for her ongoing experiments.

When she moved to Austin, Texas, in 1976, it was as a single parent with a five-year-old daughter and the intention of supporting them teaching and performing dance. This happened without compromising her work. She has produced a remarkable output of solo performances, and has become a prominent member of the artistic community, where she is praised not only for her performances but also as an extraordinary teacher and advocate. She performs and teaches all over the world, writes extensively, and has published several articles and three books, Moving Through the Universe in Bare Feet, Swallow Press, 1975, Lamb at the Altar: The Story of a Dance, Duke University Press, 1994, which are highly regarded in their genre, and My Body, The Buddhist, Wesleyan University Press, 2000.

Describe the DHDC's central philosophy, aesthetics or programming filters. What is the value system that Deborah Hay embodies?

As Northrop Frye remarks in his introduction to Gaston Bachelard's The Psychoanalysis of Fire, (transl. Alan C.M. Ross. Boston, 1964), "to the imagination, fire is not a separable datum of experience: it is already linked by analogy and identity with a dozen other aspects of experience."
The same is true, if not more so, of dance. Dancer and dance are alive with images ranging from slut to angel, animal, vegetable, mineral, water, light, love, god, spirit, dust, beauty, universe, etc. It is nearly impossible to read the body without these psychological encumbrances, in other words, not simply historical and cultural references but material imbedded in our psyches.
Hay's choreography is structured so that the dance performer must divest attachment to even the magic of each moment in order to fulfill the choreographic requirements of her dances. The dancer is then without the weight of her/his convictions about dance. What remains, for the dancer, and in turn the audience, is an opportunity to see what has not been seen before. Thus dance is alive with the recognition of one's perceptual activity rather than assurances found in memory, desire, physical training, or prowess, which, by analogy, could as well be found in sports.

What are the programs/activities that support this center and who are they designed to serve?

Most of the classes and workshops conducted by Deborah are attended by untrained and trained dancers/performers. This format continues to challenge the old paradigm about who is the dancer and what is a dance. Hay does not teach a movement technique. Her language is simple, though deceptively so. It is directed to the imaginative rather than the physical body. She seeks to instill a sense of transparency and brilliance through attention to each moment, thus bypassing assumptions about beauty and form. Her teaching is allied with how one sees others dancing, so that while the dancer is being served, so is the future audience for experimental dance.

Because writing has become a central element in Deborah Hay's understanding and the transmission of her dances, it is also part of her movement/ choreography training. Writing down the dance, giving it linear form when and where it is possible, lifts dance out of the silent world it inhabits. She believes that to write about the experience of dancing is to help address the body's intelligence, power, and magic for the dancer and dance audiences.

Watching Hay’s work, audiences realize that their usual references for making sense of what they see, fall apart. At this moment audiences can make a quantum shift in how they see. New doorways of perception can open onto an inner world within the viewer.
The DHDC’s performances are primarily showcased in 80-125 seat theaters. Her audiences are those associated with the theater in which she is presented, plus dance critics, scholars, her students, and/or a small but constant group of people who find reward in following her artistic development.

What is the criteria for success? What are the qualitative aspects that lets us know the DHDC is working?

At the most fundamental level, the company's ability to support Deborah's continuing investigations and contributions to the field of new dance is its criteria for success. Our qualitative indicators are the energy, sustenance, change, and depth Hay brings to community through her contribution to the discipline of dance and the arts in general. The Deborah Hay Dance Company's Board of Directors is dedicated and proud to support the creative life of this major figure in American dance.

The Match has four players.

What if the potential to perceive all time as unique and original, is not a theme, or movement style, or goal, but a frame for the performers to weave their bodily intelligence through a choreographed melange of notable and hidden metaphors for The Match?

Suitable definitions for The Match:

1) a person or thing that equals or resembles another in some respect
2) a person or thing that is an exact counterpart of another
3) one able to cope with another as an equal
4) a corresponding or suitably associated pair
5) a contest or game

Glossary of sounds performed in respective order in The Match:

1- an intermittent spontaneous song, hummed softly
2- a quietly spoken, untranslatable conversation, with silences
3- a golf crowd’s affirmation, as heard on TV: first the humming of group approval, followed by its applause recreated by smacking the tongue and lips together
4- the dull thwack of a performer’s hands meeting, without clapping
5- an audible bastardization of #3
6- "ffft", produced by compressing and widening the lips, and using the tongue to catapult the breath out between the front teeth - the mouth’s shape quickly restores to keep the source unseen
7- a complex, non-translatable, whispered rhythmic ditty
8- two different single syllable sound(s), or word(s), inspired by a cheer heard at a boxing, tennis, or some other kind of match
9- blowing out and sucking in air, at the same time
10- an American high school cheering rhythm, 1-2-3, 1-2-3, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7, etc., chanted with a cheerleader’s verve - transformed through a spontaneous substitution of single syllable utterances for each beat
11- the above ardent single syllable chant, deconstructed while leaving the mouth
12- "tcct", a shortened version of "tic"
13- a subdued, unintelligible, throaty talking pattern, simultaneously retracted
14- a single quiet note produced by combining a high and low tone
15- spunky, illustrative children’s-toy utterance(s)

The question that guides the performance of The Match:

What if every cell in the body at once has the potential to perceive the uniqueness and originality of time?
Note: it is possible to remove the tyranny of having to create original and unique movement if the performer understands that the question pertains to how one perceives rather than what one perceives.

The cast:

Cathy
Frank
Charles
Fiona

Note: The names of the dancers who first performed The Match, at Danspace Project, New York, NY, February 5 – 8, 2004, have been changed so future performers do not model themselves on the original cast.

Time: under one hour.

Preset: just before the last few audience members are seated Cathy enters performing a simple travelling movement with unflagging buoyancy and rhythm. As she travels, an experienced audience member might see a constantly reconfigured self along a myriad of unbeknownst pathways in space.

Six minutes later the lights begin to dim.

ACT I

Fiona, Frank, Charles: enter at their own pace for just a few moments before the lights go out.

In the dark, Charles, Fiona, and Frank move to a preset position while Cathy exits.
Lights

Fi, Fra, Chas: cross to a new location performing smartly executed movement (movement that is not driven by inner rhythm, a sense of flow, or a history of training; movement that does not feel personally gratifying) based on the 6-minute rhythmic dance established by Cathy. Fiona performs centerstage.

Fra, Fi, Chas: like three matches extinguished, movement stops.

Chas: restart and exit performing smartly executed movement.

Fi, Fra: proceed to the next location, performing instances of weightless, lyrical, spiraling movements not unlike smoke, but not like it, either. Softly hum an intermittent spontaneous love song.

Ca: As Frank reaches stage right, step onstage and embrace him.

Fi: Simultaneous with the embrace, become still.
Note: the embrace upstage and Fiona’s single figure downstage are, as if captured by a long pause.

Ca, Fra: simultaneously break into a traveling movement dialogue, with and without physical contact, and a quietly spoken, untranslatable substitute for a real conversation, with silences.

Fi: Simultaneously follow a curved path upstage, inspired by the sounds from the duet.

Chas: step onstage to form a diagonal line with the others.

Chas, Fi, Fra, Ca: take one step left.

Blackout

Fra, Ca, Fi, Chas: in the dark take one step right.

Lights

Ca, Chas, Fra, Fi: perform individual movements, best described as deliberately inconsequential, in close range to one another, eventually recombining into a set formation. Check to see that everyone ends facing the same direction.

Fi, Fra, Chas, Ca: head turns to look stage left. Produce two different sounds although they cannot be verified as such – first, a golf crowd’s affirmation, as heard on television, humming group approval: followed by its applause, recreated by smacking the tongue and lips together.

Ca, Chas, Fra, Fi: bend over or somehow lower by half, moving quickly, with deliberate inconsequentiality, maintaining a messy cluster. Produce a sporadic thwack from a pair of hands meeting, without clapping. New positions are taken.

Chas, Fra, Fi, Ca: straighten up, check for identical facing, and turn head stage left. Long pause.

Chas, Fra, Fi, Ca: television golf sounds repeat.

Ca, Fi, Chas, Fra: cross stage, in one of four roles:
1) a scientist busy at work in the lab
2) the lab
3) someone who undoes the scientist’s work
4) one who oversees the whole shebang
End in another preset arrangement.

Chas, Ca, Fi, Fra: Heads turn stage left. Short pause. Produce an audible bastardization of the golf audience instructions.

Chas, Ca, Fi, Fra: follow a curved path upstage, pulled by unrecognizable magnetic forces.

Ca, Fi, Fra, Chas: choose the sequence for performing three movements:
1) the right lower arm drops quickly, like an axe,
2) slavishly turn backward and around, and,
3) without paralleling either #1 or #2, produce a "fffft", by compressing and widening the lips, and using the tongue to catapult the breath out between the front teeth. Restore the mouth quickly so that the sound’s source is unseen.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: Four spontaneous, individual, rhythmic combinations of snappily executed steps and jumps repeats and travels along a curved path. Side by side, face inside the curve. Then, fall into a void.

Fi, Chas, Ca, Fra: retrace path, repeating the same rhythmic combination as before, but face the convex plane of the curve. (The audible rhythmic counterpoint among the four separate combinations is music. )

Ca, Fi, Chas, Fra: disperse by continuing but distorting the former rhythm and movement.

Fra, Ca, Fi, Chas: choose sequence to perform three movements:
- the right arm, bent at the elbow, pokes forward in space
- one slavish turn backward and around, and,
- produce without paralleling either #1 or #2, a "fffft", by compressing and widening the lips, and using the tongue to catapult the breath out between the front teeth. Restore the mouth quickly so the sound’s source is unseen.

Fra, Fi, Ca, Chas: rather weightless and with little impulse, perform the same movement and rhythm on tippy-toe, drawing stage right to a new set place. Add voice, in a corresponding, complex, non-translatable whisper, to accompany the elevated footsteps.

Ca, Fi: produce inconsistently two different single syllable sound(s), or word(s), inspired by a cheer heard at a boxing, tennis, or some other kind of match. Enthusiastically gesture, intermittently. Volume gradually diminishes.

Fra, Chas: run in place. No attention is given to the cheering.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: all action ceases. Head lowers.
Several immediate choices are made and remade:
a) an exhale matches the force of an inhale as a pair of facing palms exhibit excitement;
b) facing hands raise incrementally, sometimes together or separately;
c) use odd quick travel to move the action through space;
d) seemingly important little matches are made.

Chas, Ca, Fi, Fra: Before hands are fully overhead, click fingers, rock body sensually, enjoyably, commandingly, jazzily. (Practice keeps this from schlock)

Ca, Fi, Fra, Chas: Form a line downstage in front of the audience and break into the all-American high school chanting beat, 1-2-3, 1-2-3, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7, etc. Spontaneously verbalize as single syllable utterances that cheer each other and the audience. Physically charge the chanting.

Fi, Chas, Ca, Fra: move backwards upstage while the clarity of the single syllables transform into gobbilygook.

Ca, Fi, Fra: one softly spoken linear sentence is cut short with the sound, "tcct", (short for "tic"), and a spontaneous, brief, highly stylized dance. Each "tcct" starts a new dance, dynamically matching the preceding one but stylistically different from "tcct" to "tcct". Each little dance is a uniquely theatrical self meeting the moment. Exit individually.

Chas: perform only one "tcct" before a unique series of highly theatrical transformations, the duration of which is original, unique, and quintessentially contained.

Ca, Fi, Fra: (Offstage, turn away from the stage).

Chas: produce an incantation, not a plea, to draw Ca, Fi, and Fra, back to stage.

Ca, Fi, Fra: Appear at the edge of the stage, the head is the primary body part that bends, cocks, rolls, twists, and turns.

Chas: exit incanting.

Fra, Fi, Ca: travel, in random order - lift one knee hip high in front of the body, then the other. Arms are outstretched.

Fra, Ca, or Fra, Fi, or Fi, Ca: individually, in one swoop, bend forward, knees bent, say "fffft". Simultaneously, one and then the other hand stack about two feet from and facing the floor. Arms and body rise incrementally, as a unit, with and sometimes without saying "ffft".

Fi, or Ca, or Fra: exit performing knee lifts.

Fra, Ca, or Fra, Fi, or Fi, Ca: (continued): hands are almost overhead before pressing back down to the floor. Follow, original and unique, rolling over a few times, like imagined stop-frame photography.

Fi, or Ca, or Fra, plus Chas: return to stage rolling like imagined stop-frame photography.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: reverse rolling direction to spiral up into an airplane stance; arms spread to the sides, one leg bent in front of the body and the other extended behind. Banking is possible.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: in a subdued throaty voice speak and simultaneously retract unintelligible remarks. Intersperse with silence and an occasional single quiet note combining a high and low tone.
Note: The Match hypothesizes the possible with the impossible.

Fra, Fi, Chas: Individually shift from the airplane into a single gesture made in relation to the others. Sustain voices.

Ca: remain in the airplane.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: stand tall, by making incremental adjustments performed in ordinary time. Sound continues.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: eyes shut.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: ridiculously illustrative, combine voice, movement, locomotion, and attitude to spontaneously ennact a spunky, child’s toy i.e. a jack-in-the-box – a theme-and-variation combining humor, joy, corn, idiocy, and even embarrassment. Repeat again and again - a challenge to self-esteem.

Fra, Chas, Ca: exit as toy.

Fi: continue until toy breaks down, or explodes, or deconstructs, or loses steam, or malfunctions, or transforms, or stops, whatever.

Fra, Ca, Chas: crawl into view thus determining the conclusion of Fi’s solo.
Note: this is a challenging choice, not a solicitous one.

Fi: exit and reappear instantly, crawling.

Fi, Ca, Chas, Fra: Crawl anywhere and/or stop, and/or sit leaning into a hip.

Fra: stand up and perform matching nothing with everything.

Ca, Chas, Fi: do not look at Fra.

Fra: just for a moment, salute the audience.

The lights go out

My Body, the Buddhist. Wesleyan University Press, October 2000.

Introduction.
Alone in candlelight one evening several years ago I made a list of the most valued teachings learned from my teacher, my body. I wanted to itemize, to see a written account of the practical wisdom I have discovered while experimenting with my teacher as guide. Each of the eighteen lessons is a chapter title in My Body, The Buddhist .

When the inventory was complete it spanned twenty-six years. I also noticed a parallel with Buddhist thought, although I am not a practicing Buddhist. For as long as I can remember there has been a soft spot in my heart for Buddhism. Non-resistance, seen in the bodies of many Buddhists, always had much in it to draw my attention. Even as a child, I appreciated the politics of non-violence. And action, through non-action, at least as I perceived it on the surface, was secretly attractive given my middle class upbringing.

In the early 1970's, when I was living at Mad Brook Farm in Vermont, the books I was reading, in particular, Be Here Now by Baba Ram Dass, and Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism by Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, advocated a spiritual path that was analogous to my experiences dancing. I was inspired to construct a verbal dance vocabulary that merged personal and universal images. I wanted it to include the sensual experiences of perception. With the help of language, I wanted to simplify access to dancing while expanding the territory from which a dancer could draw immediate kinesthetic experience.

The proliferation of books and articles concerning Buddhist philosophy may equal the number written about the body. Yet I am certain that no two people in western culture would define in the same way either body or Buddhism. How we describe the body even changes several times a day for some of us. I have come to understand that the body's form and content are not what they appear to be - my dances are not about any one thing.

" …once you have that experience of the presence of life, don't hang onto it. Just touch and go. Touch that presence of life being lived, then go. You do not have to ignore it. "Go" does not mean that we have to turn our back on the experience and shut ourselves off from it; it means just being in it without further analysis and without further reinforcement. Holding onto life, or trying to reassure oneself that it is so, has the sense of death rather than life. "
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, The Heart of the Buddha, Shambala, 1991

My Body, as in the title of the manuscript, refers to a prescribed set of conditions organized around my work as a practicing performer, choreographer, and teacher. These imagined conditions, changed periodically, are necessary for me to even begin dancing.

"There has to be a certain discipline so that we are neither lost in daydream nor missing the freshness and openness that come from not holding our attention too tightly. This balance is a state of wakefulness, mindfulness."
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, The Heart of the Buddha, Shambala, 1991

My Body, dancing, is formed and sustained imaginatively. I re-configure the three-dimensional body into an immeasurable fifty-three trillions cells perceived perceiving, all of them, at once. Impossibly whole and ridiculous to presume, I remain, in awe of the feedback. At such times Deborah Hay assumes the devotion of a dog to its master; reading the simplest signs of life, noticing every nuance my teacher produces. When the greater part of the Buddhist world find its strength, solace, and wisdom through a practiced devotion to a guru, or Rinpoche, please imagine my hesitancy in admitting to twenty-eight years of devotion to an imagined 53-trillion-celled teacher.

My Body is unfixed. Its boundaries extend to the limits of what is visible and not visible in my practice of seeing. A field of unlimited resources is deliberately imagined because by participating in such an environment I cannot preconceive My Body's experience of the moment. My Body is deliberately not a collector.

The book's form grew from the list of chapter headings described in the first paragraph of the Introduction. I did not write the material to fit the chapter heading. I wrote the text to get a clearer picture, a wider perspective on how dancing impacts my life and how my life impacts my dance. When a story was complete, I would go through the list until an unusually obvious or unusually subtle link to a chapter heading was made. Either way, the parallel became more experiential than didactic.

My Body, The Buddhist is the work of dancer/choreographer, not schooled in theory, analysis, poetry, or criticism. I study riddles that disclose themselves when I am dancing - one every few years. Dance is the field trip I conduct in search of understanding a riddle. The manner in which jokes, riddles or games can thrill and annihilate the body's reasoning process with so much self-reflection, is similar to the experience of beginner's mind in Zen Buddhism.

It would have been antithetical to my process of inquiry to research Buddhist theory in order to substantiate my thesis. Long ago I stopped sitting at a desk, surrounded by books, gathering information. My research happens in the experiential realm dancing - standing on my two feet and moving, listening, seeing. I do not think people are going to be reading this text in order to learn about Buddhism.

I am not a practicing Buddhist. Nor am I a practiced poet, librettist, or archivist. The literary forms used in this book are liberties I have taken in order to unravel the coding between movement and perception. The libretto, poem, score, short story, were co-opted by a flag-bearer in pursuit of the study, transmission, and intelligence born in the dancing body. I will try anything to help bring some attention to the truth born here.

My Body, The Buddhist describes innate skills and basic wisdom that bodies possess but which remain untranslated because as a culture we tend to hide in our clothes. Unrecognized is the altar that rises with us in the morning and leads us to rest at night. The book's intent is to open some trapped doors that prevent awareness of the body's daringly ordinary perspicacity.

Eighteen artists, of varied disciplines, were invited to illustrate a chapter heading with either a drawing, photo, or up to a paragraph of text. None of them knew the chapter content beforehand. It was positively uncanny to observe how the submissions received corresponded to the content in the chapter heading they chose. The result of their collective participation led me to believe that My Body, The Buddhist could as well have been titled My Body, The Artist. I find this parallel very interesting.

Deborah Hay, Whidbey Island, 1998 

Performance as Practice

The performance practice for Whizz is "What if every cell in the body has the potential to distinguish loyalty and disinterestedness (in the loyalty), at once?" Most dancers have an intimate knowledge of loyalty in their relationship to the dance being performed. But the choreography of Whizz is structured to undermine attachment to that kind of loyalty. This is where disinterestedness enters the picture. "What if disinterestedness repositions the frame so that the dancer's loyalty is to the moment rather than to the dancing?" In this way, both loyalty and disinterestedness should govern the performance of Whizz.

I recently devised a baby, button, and stick analogy to help conceptualize how my performance practices work. Imagine observing a baby who is strong enough to sit up. Baby picks up a button and almost immediately the button finds its way to Baby's mouth. Baby either spits it out, chokes on the button, or swallows it. What we see is spontaneous, visceral, and predictable. Baby and the button symbolize "being" in the moment. When the button is put in the mouth it disappears from sight and becomes an invisible part of Baby. We see Baby.

The Zen approach to life tells us that "being" in the moment is not necessarily a great thing however it is all there is. Performance as a practice suggests to me that there can be more to the moment than just "being" in it.

Imagine now that Baby picks up a little brown stick. Baby moves it erratically through the air. There is no clue to the path or movement of the stick. Baby touches, pokes, bites, frames, waves, points, or drops the stick. The stick can always be picked up again. Options abound. Baby and the stick symbolize an extension of the self - territory gained, pliable, and visible. The observer notices a greater totality to the world of Baby, beyond its "being."

The nature of my performance practice is analogous to the baby's handling of a stick, but in its place I hold a linear thought, postulated as a self-perpetuating question. Within this construct, the self extends through that linear thought with the purpose of noticing possible worlds beyond the physical choreography of a dance. The question stimulates the body's curiosity and responsiveness. The dancer is thus decentralized and continuously repositioned in relation to time, space, and other.

I feel instant gratification when guided by a practice while performing choreography. This feeling reflects the psychology of the American consumer tradition. I am rewarded with an immediate sense of self-renewal, cohesion, accretion, and good conduct. I am reassured by the rules prescribed by the choreographer that includes my power to direct the flow of time. Like the consumer in a market, I am aware of my limits: how much pressure can I apply to that direction without irrevocably damaging the whole process? The limitations are the hot spot of perceptual activity, where the fieriest experimentation can be practiced.

I was invited to choreograph a dance, Whizz, for Mikhail Baryshnikov and the six-member White Oak Dance Project. I also choreographed Single Duet for Misha and myself. The opportunity to work with such sophisticated, versatile, and intelligent dancers was an exceptional privilege. I toured with them for six weeks in the Fall, 2000, guest teaching, talking to the public, and dancing with Misha in Single Duet. I also watched nearly every performance of Whizz and copied notes to give the company members afterwards. My observations were primarily directed to how they were performing the practice for Whizz, and not how they were doing the movements. Their practice determined their perceptual field, and from my perspective it was the most interesting element to observe on stage. The purpose of my feedback was ultimately to show how the inclusion of a performance practice could help loosen the tyranny of the myth of the dancer as a single coherent being - a basic element in dance training in the west. The effects of this idea can best be observed in the photographs in New York's Dance Magazine, where images of erectile dancers follow one another, page after page. My vision of the dancer, through the intervention of performance as a practice, is as a conscious flow of multiple perceptual occurrences unfolding continuously.

I contrasted Whizz with Lucinda Child's Concerto, another dance in the PastForward repertory. I had watched the company perform Concerto for six weeks, from the wings or from the house. I can still hear myself thinking, "Why am I so fascinated?" What follows are some of the notes I recently sent to the dancers.

The five strongest elements of Concerto are:
1. a tightly designed choreographic grid that punctuates its formal rigor;
2. its appeal to our desire to turn musical sensibility into a visual analogue-in this case, the power of Henryk Gorecki's ferociously driven Concerto for Harpsichord and Strings that sets the dancers in motion;
3. the choreographic balance between a strong visual geometry and the assertiveness of its persistence in motion;
4. its choreographed physicality expressing a classical, transcendent model rooted in traditional dance training;
5. and its ability to share with the audience a sense of clearly established tasks leading to the accomplishment of definite goals-through its dramatic display of speed, repetition and endurance.
By contrast, the five strongest elements of Whizz are:
1. a structure that erases causality;
2 . the independence of the dancer's physicality from the electronic music score, Alvin Lucier's Clockers;
3. an instantaneous and collaborative interplay of time and space that is the primary force in determining any given performance of Whizz, rather than the three dimensional body's preeminence in the choreographic design;
4. the dancer's spontaneously determined response to the moment, which suspends the viewer's attention and brings a sense of vulnerability to the performance;
5. and, a feeling of unity which is not modeled on any narrative, or visual cohesiveness and thus resists interpretation.

Concerto's complex and subtle template requires a sense of mastery (and loyalty) and thus a precise execution of its movements is needed for its' implied narrative to unfold. Whizz's progression is unforeseeable and the dancer is not the embodiment of a pre-existing design, but rather the author of a multiplicity of instances within the choreographic structure. Consequently each dancer's ability to manifest this, suggests his or her own music, alongside the electronic score.

My work can be traced in the questions it poses and the answers it rejects. What if performer and audience could learn to distinguish milliseconds of movement? Would that help us to realize the past and the future in the present? Would that then provide a more substantial role for the performer and the audience in the experience of dance? And, what if there are no answers to turn into history?

Introductory notes to A Lecture on the Performance of Beauty

I choreographed a solo dance, O Beautiful, in Spring 2002.

In December 2002 I hired a costume designer for O Beautiful and suggested the costume have a post–apocalyptic look .

In February 2003, after several performances, I decide not to perform O Beautiful in that costume anymore because of its influence over my dancing.

I continue a daily practice of O Beautiful through spring 2003. It becomes Beauty. I find a nice pale blue linen costume.

One day in late spring, I take off my clothes in the studio because it is very hot. I like the feeling of performing Beauty nude. It feels like the right costume for the dance.

I bring the blue linen outfit with me to London in June 2003. This way I have a choice to perform Beauty nude, or not, depending on how I feel in relation to the audience. At my age, it is not as if I want to perform without any clothes. The first dance on the program is my 40-minute solo Music. The audience is extremely receptive. After intermission, I step onstage in my pale blue costume, and ask for a volunteer from the audience. I whisper my wish that we walk upstage and that she is to undress me before returning to her seat. I hold that performance of Beauty perfect and complete.

How do I recognize my choreography?

The Solo Performance Commissioning Project began in 1998 at the Whidbey Island Center for the Arts, in the town of Langley, WA. It took place for ten days annually for five summers before it was relocated to the Findhorn Foundation Community in Scotland in 2004 where it has since been administered by Gill Clarke and staff from Independent Dance in London and by Karl Jay-Lewin of Bodysurf Scotland, at Findhorn.

Of the eight SPCPs that have taken place, about 140 solo adaptations have been realized. I have been an audience member at only a few public performances. It is at these public showings, however, that I am coming to learn what
xxxxChoreography: Deborah Hay
xxxxAdaptation and Performance: [example: Lindsay Doe]
means. This is how the credits appear when an adaptation is being performed.

What I mean by my choreography includes the transmission from me to the dancer, of the same set of questions I ask myself when I am performing a particular movement sequence that ministers shape to a dance. I will not talk about my movement choices here, except to say that as an aspect of my choreography they fall almost exclusively into three categories: 1) impossible to realize, 2) embarrassing to "do", or, idiotic to contemplate, 3) maddeningly simple. These movement directions are not unlike my questions that are 1) unanswerable, 2) impossible to truly comprehend, and, at the same time, 3) poignantly immediate.

History choreographs all of us, including dancers. The choreographed body dominates most dancing, for better or for worse. The questions that guide me through a dance are like the tools one would use for renovating an already existing house. Like a screwdriver being turned counter-clockwise, or a crow bar prying boards free from a wall, the dancer applies the questions to re-choreograph his/her perceived relationship to him/herself, the audience, space, time, and the instantaneous awareness of any of these combined experiences. The questions help uproot behavior that gathers experimentally and/or experientially.

When I see a singularly coherent choreographed body, performing a solo adaptation, I know that the dancer is not choosing to exercise the re-measuring tools needed to counter-choreograph the predominance of learned behavior. I use the words "choosing to exercise" because most of us know exactly what is required when we choose to train the physical body to adapt to a choreographer’s aesthetics. Training oneself in a questioning process that counter-choreographs the learned body requires similar devotion and constancy.

Every dancer who learns one of my solo dances, signs a contract, committing to a minimum three months of practice before the first public performance of his/her solo adaptation. Three months is not an estimate. It is based on my experience with new material. In order to recognize all the ways I hold onto ideas, images, suppositions, beliefs, the ways my body attaches to what I think the material ‘is’, or should feel like, or look, I need to be alone in a studio, noticing the infinitely momentary feedback that arises from my daily performance of a reliable sequence of movement directions, influenced by the immediacy arising from the same questions day after day after day.

I recognize my choreography when I see a dancer’s self-regulated transcendence of his/her choreographed body within in a movement sequence that distinguishes one dance from another.

THE MATCH

The Match is a quartet, choreographed and directed by Deborah Hay. It premiered at Danspace Project at St. Mark’s Church in New York City in February 2004. In September 2004, Deborah Hay received a New York Bessie Award for the choreography of The Match. It was made for a select group of highly experienced dancer/performers: Ros Warby from Melbourne, Australia, Chrysa Parkinson and Wally Cardona, New York City, and Mark Lorimer, London. Noted lighting designer Jennifer Tipton created the lighting for these performances.

        "…[It] is a fascinating, vibrant battle of wits that unfolds through a silent score of movement." TimeOut New York, issue #435, 2004

The Match contains meditation-like exercises that invisibly bind the dancers to the material by establishing a mental, emotional, and bodily idiom that manifests in the performance ensemble.

        "There is no musical accompaniment, so the focus is on the dancers: their mystifying travels and relationships, both spatial and personal, and the satisfying way Ms. Hay distributes them about the space. …Who knows what was going on, seemingly in real time, in the strange and surprisingly handsome little world of "The Match"? There was nowhere else to look, however, and that was good." Jennifer Dunning, New York Times, 2/13/04

Following the Danspace performances, each dancer began a solo adaptation of the quartet. Sensations, memories, fragments, and details from The Match are embedded in the solo adaptations. A daily practice of the performance of the solo, by each dancer, was the method by which the adaptation becomes a collaboration rather than a bodily reenactment of already existing material, thus stretching the historical norms that have determined how dance is transmitted.

THE ARTISTS

Wally Cardona came to New York City to attend The Juilliard School (BFA in Dance '89). He was a member of the Ralph Lemon Company from 1987-95. In 1997, he founded the Wally Cardona Quartet and has since created seven works for the group. Upcoming projects include a new work created for the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave Festival (2005).

Mark Lorimer trained at London Contemporary Dance School and worked a few years with Lea Anderson/The Featherstonehaughs before moving to Brussels. There he spent the last 10 years working with Rosas/Anne-Teresa De Keersmaeker, and ZOO/Thomas Hauert (founder member).
Chrysa Parkinson is a performer and teacher living in Brussels and New York. She is a member of Tere O'Connor Dance (since 1987). She is currently working with Zoo/Thomas Hauert(BE), and David Zambrano(NL). In 1996 she was awarded a Bessie (New York Dance and Performance Award) for sustained achievement.

Ros Warby is a Melbourne based dancer and choreographer. She has performed with the Lucy Guerin Co, Deborah Hay Dance Co, and Danceworks. Warby received a Greenroom performance award in 2000, and ‘SOLOS’, received the 2002 Greenroom award for best solo performance, and nominations for best production and design. Her recent work, SWIFT, was short listed for the Australian Dance award 2003. Warby is an Australia Council Fellowship recipient for 2002-2004.

Jennifer Tipton is well known for her work in theater, dance and opera. Her recent work in opera includes Martin David Levy’s Mourning Becomes Electra at the Seattle Opera, Janacek’s Osud at Bard’s Fisher Performing Arts Center and Don Giovanni at La Monnaie in Brussels. Her recent work in dance includes Paul Taylor's Le Grand Puppetier and Trisha Brown's Present Tense. In theater her recent work includes Hamlet at Yale, Cavedweller at the NY Theater Workshop and the new work in progress for the Wooster Group. Ms. Tipton teaches lighting at the Yale School of Drama. She is the recipient of the Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize for 2001 and the Jerome Robbins Prize in 2003.

In 1960 Deborah Hay became part a group of experimental artists who were primarily influenced by Merce Cunningham and John Cage, later known as the Judson Dance Theater. In 1964 she danced with the Cunningham Dance Company during a 6-month tour through Europe and Asia. By 1967 she focused on large-scale dance projects involving untrained dancers, thus distancing herself from the performing arena and opening a long period of reflection about how dance is transmitted and who dances. In 1970 she left New York and settled in a community in northern Vermont. In this period Hay began to define a rigorous method of performance practice that still continues to inform her work as a student, teacher, and dancer. In 1976 she moved to Austin, Texas. Her attention focused now on ‘playing awake’, practices that engage the whole person who is performing. Her second book, Lamb at the Altar: The Story of a Dance (Duke University Press, 1994) documents the unique creative process that defines this work. Her third book, My Body, the Buddhist, was published by Wesleyan University Press in 2000. Since the mid-nineties she has focused almost exclusively on the choreography of solo dances, performing them around the world and passing them on to notable performers in the US, Europe, and Australia. Recently Mikhail Baryshnikov observed that "there are aspects of dance performance that I had always accepted as a given. Working with Deborah Hay has deepened my understanding of what we do as dancers. She has helped bring a greater vitality to the stage."
Deborah Hay tours in the US, Europe, and Australia both as a performer and a teacher. She received a 1983 Guggenheim Fellowship in choreography, numerous National Endowment for the Arts Choreography Fellowships, and the Rockefeller Foundation Bellagio Fellowship in 1996. In 2002 she was inducted into the first Hall of Fame for the Arts, in Austin, Texas and in 2004 she received a New York Bessie Award for her choreography of The Match.

From 1998 through 2002 Deborah Hay conducted the Solo Performance Commissioning Project on Whidbey Island, at the Whidbey Island Center for the Arts, in Washington State.

"The Match is a fascinating, vibrant battle of wits that unfolds through a silent score of movement."

Gia Skourias, TimeOut New York, Jan.29-Feb 5, 2004

"Hay is a National Living Treasure, having forged a unique mode of performance that lives vividly, unfolding before our eyes… dancing on a razor’s edge of nowness brings exhilaration to dancer and audience alike."

Lisa Kraus, The Dance Insider, Feb. 2004

"There is no musical accompaniment, so the focus is on the dancers: their mystifying travels and relationships, both spatial and personal, and the satisfying way Ms. Hay distributes them about the space. …Who knows what was going on, seemingly in real time, in the strange and surprisingly handsome little world of The Match? There was nowhere else to look, however, and that was good."

Jennifer Dunning, New York Times, Feb.13 2004

"Every time Hay has come to New York from her Austin, Texas, home base in recent years, I’ve been fascinated by the interplay of humor and seriousness in her work. Quiet mystery yields to shenanigans via invisible transitions in ways that bring to mind the tricksters of American Indian ritual."

Deborah Jowitt, The Village Voice, Feb. 25 2004

"They surprise and amuse us with the profound simplicity and directness of their actions. And Hay’s imagination stimulates ours as we watch."

Gus Solomons, Dance Magazine, May 2004

In August, 2004, the SPCP Helsinki was held in Helsinki, for performers from Finland and Northern Europe. Since August 2004 the SPCP has taken place at Findhorn, Scotland, and it will take place there again in 2011, from August 24 through September 2.

NOTE FROM DEBORAH HAY: In order to maintain my own creative growth and support the same in the dancer/choreographers who plan to attend the 2011 Solo Performance Commissioning Project, I would like to augment the criteria that the dancer/choreographer needs to consider in relation to her/his experience in the field.
 
 In addition to the already existing criteria, I propose;

1)   that you are already consciously working with time and space as tangible materials that serve your dancing and/or choreography; and,
2)   that you are already resourcing areas outside of your physical body to support and enhance your dancing; and,
3)   that you have had enough experience in dance and performance to provide you with a deep sense of trust in the feedback from your body as your teacher, and
4)   that how you see while you are dancing is an area of performance that you recognize as substantial.
 
Currently registered participants who do not consider themselves able to meet the additional criteria will have their registration fee reimbursed in full. I apologize for any unnecessary complexity this may introduce into anyone’s life.

WHAT IS THE SOLO PERFORMANCE COMMISSIONING PROJECT?

Dancers commission a solo dance from Deborah Hay. She guides and coaches them in the performance of the solo during an 11-day period in a residency setting. At the conclusion of the residency each participant signs a contractual agreement to a daily solo practice of the new piece, for a minimum of three months before their first public performance.

What is unique about this project is that the dancers must raise the commissioning fee from within his/her community. This becomes the selection process by which a performer attends the SPCP. Community, whether family, friends, local, state, or national granting agencies, corporations, become the patrons for each dance. All patrons receive program acknowledgment every time the solo is performed by any of the participating dancers.

Notes for the 2009 SPCP

In my 1998 introduction to the Solo Performance Commissioning Project (see below), I felt like I could promise artists a choreographed solo dance that would simply require a daily practice, otherwise called learning without thinking, for three months prior to their first public performance of the solo adaptation. I thought the SPCP would appeal to experienced performers who were terrified or overwhelmed with making or performing solo work.

In 2007 it was apparent that I needed to describe the barely recognizable yet quintessential transformation that takes place during the artist’s adaptation process. I wrote that assuming everyone is choreographed up the wazoo by culture, politics, gender, dance training, etc., a sustained and steady self-regulated transcendence of the choreographed body has to be exercised within the sequence of movements being practiced.

At the 2008 SPCP at Findhorn, Scotland, four solo adaptations, The Ridge (2005), News (2006), and 2 adaptations of The Runner (2007), were informally presented. The SPCP participants and a few members of the Findhorn community made up the audience. I saw four self-regulated transcendent solo practices of performance, yet little distinguished one dance from the other. Although the movement directions were different, each solo was performed with a similar dynamic and structural open-endedness, like four rivers without their banks. I realized that something more needed encouragement from within the adaptation process, and that is the aesthetic predisposition that brings each individual to the SPCP in the first place.

Just before the 2008 SPCP I asked, "what if dance is how I practice relationship with my whole body in relationship to the space where I am dancing in relationship to each passing moment in relationship to my audience?"

A house can be defined as a container for relationship. A house can be designed to animate or obscure relationship. The SPCP participant needs a house to reflect and enliven his/her practice of relationship while preserving the choreography. A sensitive integration of these three components,

1) the practice of relationship, or performance, or dancing,
2) the choreography, and
3) the house,

are paramount during the three month minimum solo adaptation process.

In my role as choreographer I provide the tangibility of a movement sequence and the intangibility of strategies to engage in the performance of that movement. The dancer/choreographer adds a house to frame the wizardry of his/her boundless perceptual activity. Aside from my strong suggestion to edit the choreographed material, i.e. let go of what does not work in the sequence of given movements, there are opportunities to costume, stage, light, add sets, and/or other media. These elements are to some degree the exterior architecture. Some of the solo adaptations I have seen have assumed this dimension, but ten years later it is time to get more explicit about this dimension of creativity within the formal construct of the solo adaptation.

Building a house ups the ante for the 2009 SPCP participant.

The Aesthetic Preferences and Artistic Orientation of the Performer in the Solo Commissioning Project Conceived by Deborah Hay (1998)

This list can help determine whether the SPCP is applicable to you as a practitioner of movement and/or performance art, including acting. Those not familiar with my work should consider each item and determine whether these attributes are ones either already familiar to you and/or ones you wish to conscientiously exercise.

    _Your ability to laugh at your serious intentions at any given moment is a tool you like to remember to use.

    _You have explored "self-expression" and found it limiting as a means to create performance continuity.
    _You are drawn to explore movement in all its variety - either through a cultivated or ingrained absence of discrimination.

    _You are not content with partial practice.
    _You want your process to be continually challenged.

    _Your respect for the intelligence of your whole body is unqualified.
    _In performance, your non-attachment to professional training in dance or techniques in acting is a source of on-going insight, and delight.

    _You are without fear of appearing foolish in your capacity to violate form in order to recognize where and why it exists.
    _Integral to your experience of performance is an inclusive regard for the presence of your audience.

    _You are becoming or already are skilled at monitoring your own performance.

What this means is you have developed a capacity to witness yourself from more than one perspective at once, not as a judge but a guide in the practice of attention.

"Through her courageous choreographic and performance practice, remarkable language and immediate presence, Deborah has touched and stimulated the most essential places in my artistic expression, encouraging the integration of every aspect of my performing self with my dance. And here I remember the pleasure in dance. I experience an availability, a flexibility, a wholeness rarely evoked through any other form - touching on my child, adult, fool, craftsman, artist and essential nature - accessing a very alive and ready state from which to work." - Ros Warby, dancer/choreographer

"At a time in my career when I was feeling stagnant, Deborah's work reintroduced me to my own dancing; to dance as a living thing. Her gentle and powerful focus in teaching cuts through old patterns and internal obstacles with fierce intellect and compassion, leaving me amazed to discover myself. Learning and dancing Beauty was like having the top of my head opened to the whole sky." Emily Stein, dancer/choreographer

"Deborah creates an atmosphere with which one can playfully and thoughtfully study the phenomenon of performance while enabling one to freely learn through their own experiences, the subtleties and largeness of art-making and one's presence within it." Amelia Reeber, dancer/choreographer

"Deborah has taught me to notice the physical presence of my favorite things about being a human being, and that they themselves, not representations of them, can be the material for choreography because I am an agent for their physicality. To me, this really is an invention that I have never seen or felt before. And I feel it before I know it because of everything about the Solo Performance Commissioning Project: Deborah's choreography, her teaching strategies, the use of our time." Kathryn Johnson, dancer/choreographer 

WORKING WITH DEBORAH HAY

Deborah Hay's orientation to dance is activated by attention to practices of performance. In an intense learning environment she challenges the experienced performer with movement concepts that trigger multiple levels of perception at once. She choreographs the world "between" moments, where movement proclivity plays second fiddle to exercised inquiry.

With the Solo Performance Commissioning Project all participating artists commission the same solo dance choreographed by Deborah Hay.

Hay rarely demonstrates solutions to the choreography. Rather, she conveys her concepts through directives that each performer translates individually into movement in his/her unique way. As part of the process, the artist is bound to the material through meditation-like exercises that are applied throughout the choreographed dance.

In the latter half of the SPCP each artist is personally coached in his/her performance of the dance, with everyone present. Ultimately the solo is adapted by each performer through a period of practice that extends into the months following the project.

"There are aspects of dance performance that I had always accepted as a given. Working with Deborah Hay has deepened my understanding of what we do as dancers. She has helped bring a greater vitality to the stage.
Mikhail Baryshnikov, 2001

"A master performer sensitive to the slightest shift of imagery and tone, Deborah Hay has continued in the postmodern tradition of the Judson Dance Theater, which she helped to found, for more than four decades now."
New York Times, 2001

"I marvel at her high-wire walk between clarity and enigma. She transforms in seconds from shaman to trickster to bawdy comedian to grave adventurer. You don't so much read her gestures or decipher her whispers as inhale them."
Village Voice, 2001

" It's a simple act made glorious by a consuming dance intelligence."
The San Diego Union Tribune, 2001

"FIRE examines the visceral experience of the performer faced with spectators… Boom Boom Boom represents both an ideal introduction and a distillation of Hay's utterly inimitable art."
Austin American-Statesman, 2000

"…she charged the room with receptivity… what endured was a sense of the elusive mutability of fire, much like her moment-to-moment process of creating movement."
The Philadelphia Inquirer, 2000

"The spell was cast by Texas' grand dame of modern dance… she proved that one doesn't have to leap around the stage to bristle with energy."
Houston Chronicle, 1999

"Hay's magnificent presence - is invested with newfound dramatic meaning..while her comic timing was never more precisely calibrated. It's a performance to remember."
Austin American-Statesman, 1999

"…the best work I saw: dance so physical that it becomes metaphysical -- without gimmicks, hype, or spin."
The Drama Review, 1998

An experimentalist in soul and body
New York Times, 3/30/97

" her imagination has always been marked by playfulness in seriousness, by a blend of sophistication, thoughtfulness, and seeming naivete."
Village Voice, 1996

"… Hay plumbs the tragic in the humorous, and vice versa, keeping us emotionally mobile and receptive. The condition of watching, and of being, becomes perpetually transformational, without continuity or closure. It's an experience of constant deferment."
Texas Observer, 1995

"For 40 minutes, we were alive. Voilá proved to be the most concentrated 40 minutes of performance in this critic's recent memory."
Austin American-Statesman, 1995

"Only one strongly centered can be this eccentric. The entire community lives in her."
Village Voice, 1994

"…a revelatory, sometimes maddening experiment in elemental movement. [She is] a choreographer of exceptional vision."
Chicago Sun-Times 1994

"The room remained charged with our attention… It's a testament to her personal magnetism that we left with new energy, reflecting on how remarkable human beings are."
The Village Voice 1992

"…a dance of adjustments wrought with delicate precision, following the guidance of the body as opposed to the mind."
The Village Voice 1990

"Hay is such a strong, sure and seasoned artist that one is willing, as always, to follow her fearlessly into her luminous world. The effort of attention is repaid."
The New York Times 1990

"…she purges the viewer's perception by disallowing both the superfluous and the superficial."
Dance Magazine, 1989

"Hay's work remains unrepentantly bizarre, partially because of its insistent simplicity, also from the choice and juxtaposition of movements, but more from the way it defies intellectual analysis and forces strong reactions."
Oasis, The Magazine of Texas Arts 1988

"…an artist who has steadily forged an unmistakable style and esthetic."
The New York Times 1987

"One tends to study Hay closely, because her metier is transformation of movement so expertly achieved, it's difficult to tell how it is done."
Dance Magazine 1986

"Hay's work appears to be meticulously conceived, recalling Noh drama in its concision and compactness."
Express/News, San Antonio 1985

"…she had a presence that would have done credit to Isadora and the concentration of a Balanchine ballerina."
The Weekly, Seattle,1984

"She makes dances of uncanny beauty…Everything counts in her mysteriously evocative dance edifices."
Artlines, Taos, NM 1983

"No one else in the world would do these things!"
Dance Magazine 1981

"The Match is a fascinating, vibrant battle of wits that unfolds through a silent score of movement."

Gia Skourias, TimeOut New York, Jan.29-Feb 5, 2004

"Hay is a National Living Treasure, having forged a unique mode of performance that lives vividly, unfolding before our eyes… dancing on a razor’s edge of nowness brings exhilaration to dancer and audience alike."

Lisa Kraus, The Dance Insider, Feb. 2004

"There is no musical accompaniment, so the focus is on the dancers: their mystifying travels and relationships, both spatial and personal, and the satisfying way Ms. Hay distributes them about the space. …Who knows what was going on, seemingly in real time, in the strange and surprisingly handsome little world of The Match? There was nowhere else to look, however, and that was good."

Jennifer Dunning, New York Times, Feb.13 2004

"Every time Hay has come to New York from her Austin, Texas, home base in recent years, I’ve been fascinated by the interplay of humor and seriousness in her work. Quiet mystery yields to shenanigans via invisible transitions in ways that bring to mind the tricksters of American Indian ritual."

Deborah Jowitt, The Village Voice, Feb. 25 2004

"They surprise and amuse us with the profound simplicity and directness of their actions. And Hay’s imagination stimulates ours as we watch."

Gus Solomons, Dance Magazine, May 2004