What if Now Is? (2001)

The score for The Other Side of O (1998), Part 1 of dance trilogy Boom Boom Boom
choreographed, performed, and written by Deborah Hay

Program notes: Touch the tip of one index finger to the other. Do the same with your thumbs. With these fingertips connected, open the space between them, to form an O. Now separate your hands. What remains is the other side of O. This absence of boundary is the choreographed site for The Other Side of O.

Over the years, my attempts to identify harmony have been impaired by the complexity of my cultural background. After all, I grew up in the United States at a time when harmony was not a realistic measure of individual worth. Having spent my childhood in a Brooklyn Jewish ghetto in the forties, I became aware of the suppression and repression at work in the following decade, an era of so-called prosperity and social harmony. When the upheaval of sixties confronted this fiction, I was immersed in the New York art world, which was at the frontline of political and cultural struggle. At this time, harmony could well have been perceived by my generation as the byproduct of friction. Once the rebellion was spent and in some instances disbanded, the seventies reclaimed the idea of harmony through a retreat to nature and an increased preoccupation with self-awareness. During the eighties and nineties, the doggedness necessary to pursue my commitment to the field of dance did at times feel to me as some form of accord. In spite of these occasional brushes with harmony through my life, defining it has never been a concern in my choreographic work.

The subject of harmony as reflected upon by dancers and choreographers throughout this century, through flowing movement, phrasing, lighting, physical relationships, and costuming, often suggests an idealism that finds me embarrassed and fearful for dance as a serious art form.

However, a whole new light on the concept of harmony was cast while choreographing The Other Side of O. My meditation practice was what if now is here? (my feminist centennial response to the sixties teaching “Be Here Now”, authored by Baba Ram Dass). This practice was meant to question my mental habits in regard to time and space, by proposing here as moment and now as place. A new question emerged out of this exercise; what if now is here is harmony? – i.e. what if I could consider notions of harmony through challenges to my sense of perceptual order by transposing time and space?

Here provided me with a strikingly vivid sense of location that included a constant repositioning of my body in relation to physical space. My body included a real and imagined presence of my history until now, and then now, and then now. Now was the immediate reading of juxtaposed experiences; a spectacle without motive or consequence. In this context, if here was temporal and now was personal, I had more than enough co-existing material to keep me decentralized and busy noticing how singularly theatrical and total each moment was. With no remaining time or space for an interpretation of harmony, what if now is here is harmony? became my back door approach to what I did not care to enter frontally.

What if now is here is harmony? is a self-perpetuating question that is continually applied to my perceptual field of activity while I perform the choreography of The Other Side of O.

I hate my costume. A red pouf hair ornament is arranged on my head and a gaudy red-jeweled ring in a bright gold setting is on the middle finger of my right hand. I never wear a ring. It makes all my fingers look stunted. I wear an oddly designed black jumpsuit with an attached pair of stiff organza pants that rise up and beyond the sides of my hips. A pair of flat crimson suede shoes turns my feet into spatulas. My ankles look weak. I steal a glance in the mirror and think, “O god. I look horrible, old, ugly, and idiotic,” which is precisely what the choreographer hoped to achieve. The dancer and audience must see through the costume to see the dance. Then I leave the mirror, look down, empty my head and get quiet. Always ready, in costume for at least five minutes before anyone comes to get me, I stand and wait just inside the dressing room door.

The square-toed suede shoes directly approach the perimeter of a large imagined circle on the stage floor. With simple means I trace its border so the audience can also see it. The hollow clacking of leather soles becomes part of the circle making process. I make musical choices with these sounds. What if now is here is harmony?

Completing the circle I place my body in it, like a cook tasting again and again the combined flavors of new stew. The movements are a little off-track and offbeat, not exaggeratedly, but “just enough”, which keeps me on my toes. I selectively alter the shape of my body and the apportioning of time and space within a shape so that the movements suggest, but fall short of association. I think that the alertness required of me alerts audiences likewise. They too are not quite able to determine where I am or where I might go next. From this movement away from material lodged in dance history, training, and culture, one movement starts to repeat, with clock-like regularity, and it repeats two, or up to nine times. A new movement surfaces and that repeats for a different number of repetitions. After the opening circle, The Other Side of O travels between two points, upstage right and downstage left. Fixed by the choreographer, it behooves the performer to conceal the linearity of this single diagonal unit. Travelling from upstage right to downstage left, I create a path that cannot read as a path, delighting in riddle-making. At the same time I am mediating these moments through my bodily responses to what if now is here is harmony? Waves of liberating energy flow within the confines of the choreographic structure. I feel generous, inviting being seen with few obvious connections to physical, social, cultural, and historical behavior. Some audiences may fear their inexpertness in seeing this as dance. Some learn to laugh at it. I adhere to the choreography, which gives me a sense of good conduct, refinement, and clarity. I feel generous where normally I describe myself as selfish. There is a difference between the performer and the same person who is not performing. The two entities may resemble each other but they are not the same.

Almost to the corner, I proceed to enact a single movement repeatedly. With each repetition my experience of it shifts. I perform the movement while turning in place, therefore what I see invariably alters. I note different body parts accentuated in the course of my many many repetitions – it may be the awareness of my wrist meeting space or the way my face is met by an audience member’s eyes, remembering what if now is here is harmony? I have a strong notion that the audience has noticed this unforeseeably fascinating bodiliness, including the sounds of my shoe soles hitting the floor. I inconspicuously slow down or speed up so that time appears stretched or shortened.

In the middle of the last repetition, I am out of it. The choreographer wants my return path so complex it cannot be recreated. What contributes more to complexity? Is it subtlety or the spatiality of a particular floor pattern or the spontaneous combinations of perky steps deemed necessary, by the choreographer, to cover space? At the end of each little combination I stand with my chest uplifted, rolling my head down, up, and back over my left shoulder. A new perky step combination then begins. However, like a batter with his bat, I am free not to accomplish the head roll the first time. I can return to the beginning of the movement, dropping my head down, before completing the full action. I get a kick out of this. I still want to get things right the first time. It’s nice having more than once chance. Ms. Glamorous toss-of-the-head, dressed in dowdy red flounce, ferociously penetrates her cultural taboos through her practice what if now is here is harmony?

My back is visible and crouched forward in the upstage corner. Whispers are issued as commands that I respond to with an assortment of small cries. Yet the cries and whispers are distilled into non-associative sounds before they leave my body. My crimson shoes’ leather heels and toes rapidly drum the floor. These three elements are spontaneously determined and rearranged as I return downstage obscuring the diagonal directive. Very tiny selective backward footsteps through an imagined restricted space slows the course of my action until my arrival, clear to me, is announced with a naturally spoken “boom.”

To void the “boom” my left arm shoots diagonally upwards across my chest. My arm retracts by cocking the wrist, pulling it slightly to me, and saying “ah”. My mouth stays open. There are innumerable options for closing it. I shift into a shiftlessness that hypothesizes not being anywhere long enough to experience being anywhere and here the stricture of the invisible diagonal pattern is finally broken. I cry aloud “waaaee”, thrust my left palm forward, and remove the gesture instantly. Bob Rauschenberg once told me, “Never wait for anything.”

My exit is my entrance. I leave stage,like a cook tasting again and again the combined flavors of new stew. The movements are a little offbeat, not exaggeratedly, but “just enough” which keeps me on my toes. I selectively alter the shape of my body and the apportioning of time and space within a shape so that the movements suggest, but fall short of association. I think that the alertness required of me alerts audiences likewise. They too are not quite able to determine where I am or where I might go next. At the same time I am mediating these moments through the bodily exercise what if now is here is harmony? as the light slowly fades.

Beauty
Choreography, Performance, and Text by Deborah Hay

Notes for the performer of Beauty

What if the you who dances is less like a dancer and more like a computational neuroscientist whose research defines our current understanding of consciousness and normalcy? Some differences are;

1) that as a dancer your laboratory functions best when it is empty whereas a computational neuroscientist needs, at least, a desk, chair, computer, etc;
2) that as a dancer you are not required to write papers in order to be recognized, although it can help;
3) that as a dancer the dynamism of your whole body is necessary to your research whereas a computational neuroscientist needs mental focus;
4) that as a dancer your computational methodologies do not require exactitude because your experimentation is non-quantitative.

You are alone onstage and noticeably different from the person who was alone in the dressing room moments ago. Your body, then, got you to this stage. Now you shimmer.

What if shimmering is the commingling of non-linear, non-representational activity, palpable on all planes, and as far as your eyes can and cannot see? What if everyone in this theater is aware of this mysterious vitality, and feels compelled to focus beyond you for insight? Who benefits? You? Members of the audience? Both you and the audience?

What if, as a counterpart to your shimmering, you exercise your skills for undermining the ordinariness of time? As strong as your genetic and bodily response to inner rhythm and beat may actually feel, you operate more like a jazz musician who turns a song into an eclectic reconfiguration of notes and phrases that defy order, subvert the expected, and then coalesce masterfully.

What if where you are experimentally, is testing the kind of movement that comes naturally; the kind of behavioral patterning that flows from a reservoir of training and acquired tastes that lodge like a fashionable ski resort at the foot of a beautiful mountain in the Rockies?

What if there is a question, applied like a guideline to Beauty, a question that functions like the rudder of a small boat heading out to sea at night? The rudder is in the hand of an experienced boatsman, just as the question is in the body of the dancer. The rudder keeps the boat on course in the same way the question guides the dancer. The steering hand on the rudder bar is relaxed and responsive, like the mind of the dancer. The boatsman heads out to sea without knowledge of what will befall him, yet he is inseparable from his world: the water, the night sky, wind, and the currents that slap against the surface of his launch. In much the same spirit, the theater is your world, and you attend to your navigation by keeping the question current. It is the question that guides you through the night of Beauty. To answer the question is to narrow the immensity of its beauty.

The choreographer’s confession

Stage directions: the performer drops her manuscript and begin talking to your audience about the current politic climate in the US. She describes her inadequacy in articulating concerns about the Bush administration. She can hear only her anger and rage and is fully aware of how ineffective her arguments are under these conditions. She apologizes for her lack of details and analysis. She ends with this remark: “Dance is my form of political activism. It is not what or why I dance. It is that I dance.”

The choreographer’s question for the performer of Beauty

What if every cell in your body has the potential to perceive beauty and surrender beauty, at once, each and every moment?

The choreography

Do you relate to the presence of a straight path? It is always there, whether it is followed or not. What if your experience of a straight path is a source of real or imagined security, order, clarity and strength within the construct of Beauty? What if departing from the path takes into account your revolutionary spirit, providing space for the anarchist, the individualist, the surly, the part of you who enjoys playing the odds, testing the limits? She’s the emblem of, the land I love, the home of the free and the brave. You can leave the path because you know where it is when you want to return. Are you willing to take risks? Are you serious enough to risk foolishness? What do you think of life without foolishness? What if what really matters is that you remain doggedly aware of the dog path whether you are on or off of it, getting what you need wherever you choose to be? Let freedom ring. What if being off the path is performed not from obstinacy or will but as a voice for change, nuance, absurdity, beauty, inclusion? My country tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing… The world flowers when you depart from the straight path because excitement arises through your proximity to, as well as your distance from it. What if a real and/or imagined straight path is the only measure by which you know where you are? The path is your bearing. And, what if your choice to perceive and surrender beauty as life unfolds, on the path, or off the path, is your only means of survival? O beautiful, for spacious skies…

At the far end of the straight path, in quadrant I, Beauty travels counter-clockwise, first away from, and then returning to the straight path. The journey is along a single curve, like the outline of a pregnant belly. .stand beside her, and guide her, through the night with the light from above…What if beauty is the innate performance of feminine power, before memory, without signification, and inclusive of emotion? Pure memory, like a dog with a snake in its jaws, a gorgeous management of energy.
choreographer’s aside to herself: Beauty also includes the absence of a desirable homeland in my life.

What if upon meeting the staged and metaphorical straight path once more, you imagine getting everything you need or think you need? What if you take whatever time is required to assuage need that is always there? What do you need? The answer is too long. It prohibits telling now. But every cell requires oxygen, yes? Thus you are liberated from possibly enacting what it might look like to have need fulfilled. glory glory hallelulla, glory glory hallelulla…

In quadrant II, Beauty is ‘work’, symbolized by repetitive and insistent movement, driven by a passion to survive, a determination to exist for another year, no matter the cost. At some point you even get down on the floor with no drive to make this look good, driven by the desire to experience beauty wherever you are. You deliberately avoid smooth action, economy, or alignment. You do not make it easy just because you are performing in front of an audience. You are unbeguiling, and driven, caught in making your work work. You are a rat. You will not be mislead by looking for beauty in shape and/or content. You notice beauty for infinitesimally small instances. It is gorgeous. It is enough.

What if upon coming up to the staged and metaphorical straight path once more, you imagine getting everything you need or think you need, like silence in the middle of the day, a scarf in cold weather, cream for your coffee. Every heart beats true…

In the fourth quadrant you ‘look up’ while perceiving beauty.

Choreographer’s aside: This is difficult, particularly indoors. Try it. As a gesture the poetic or narrative relevance of ‘looking up’ is not applicable in Beauty. For instance, looking up suggests hope and hope has no context onstage except as a function of narrative. As a performer ‘looking up’ expands your personal landscape. Looking up is about becoming more inclusive in your perception of beauty. O beautiful, o beautiful….

As you look up you follow a curved path leading to the top of quadrant four. You return to the starting point of Beauty, the metaphorical apex of the dance, the highest point, the holiest of holy places. my home sweet home, my home sweet home…
Whole and solemn, you follow a petal-shaped path downstage. This is your passport for the resolution of Beauty, where you test your affinity for and disconnectedness from the blueprint that has held you in performance. O beautiful…. O beautiful.

Finally you detach from the blueprint for Beauty, the cipher you have milked for continuity and definition. You enter an imagined void, where the encapsulation of your wit, pathos, memory, disillusionment; the presence of love and anger, form and formlessness, all, merge into nothing but Beauty. 

The Match, 2004
Choreography and script by Deborah Hay

The Match has four players.

What if the potential to perceive all time as unique and original, is not a theme, or movement style, or goal, but a frame for the performers to weave their bodily intelligence through a choreographed melange of notable and hidden metaphors for The Match?

Suitable definitions for The Match:

1) a person or thing that equals or resembles another in some respect
2) a person or thing that is an exact counterpart of another
3) one able to cope with another as an equal
4) a corresponding or suitably associated pair
5) a contest or game

Glossary of sounds performed in respective order in The Match:

1- an intermittent spontaneous song, hummed softly
2- a quietly spoken, untranslatable conversation, with silences
3- a golf crowd’s affirmation, as heard on TV: first the humming of group approval, followed by its applause recreated by smacking the tongue and lips together
4- the dull thwack of a performer’s hands meeting, without clapping
5- an audible bastardization of #3
6- “ffft”, produced by compressing and widening the lips, and using the tongue to catapult the breath out between the front teeth - the mouth’s shape quickly restores to keep the source unseen
7- a complex, non-translatable, whispered rhythmic ditty
8- two different single syllable sound(s), or word(s), inspired by a cheer heard at a boxing, tennis, or some other kind of match
9- blowing out and sucking in air, at the same time
10- an American high school cheering rhythm, 1-2-3, 1-2-3, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7, etc., chanted with a cheerleader’s verve - transformed through a spontaneous substitution of single syllable utterances for each beat
11- the above ardent single syllable chant, deconstructed while leaving the mouth
12- “tcct”, a shortened version of “tic”
13- a subdued, unintelligible, throaty talking pattern, simultaneously retracted
14- a single quiet note produced by combining a high and low tone
15- spunky, illustrative children’s-toy utterance(s)

The question that guides the performance of The Match:

What if every cell in the body at once has the potential to perceive the uniqueness and originality of time?
Note: it is possible to remove the tyranny of having to create original and unique movement if the performer understands that the question pertains to how one perceives rather than what one perceives.

The cast:

Cathy
Frank
Charles
Fiona

Note: The names of the dancers who first performed The Match, at Danspace Project, New York, NY, February 5 – 8, 2004, have been changed so future performers do not model themselves on the original cast.

Time: under one hour.

Preset: just before the last few audience members are seated Cathy enters performing a simple travelling movement with unflagging buoyancy and rhythm. As she travels, an experienced audience member might see a constantly reconfigured self along a myriad of unbeknownst pathways in space.

Six minutes later the lights begin to dim.

ACT I

Fiona, Frank, Charles: enter at their own pace for just a few moments before the lights go out.

In the dark, Charles, Fiona, and Frank move to a preset position while Cathy exits.
Lights

Fi, Fra, Chas: cross to a new location performing smartly executed movement (movement that is not driven by inner rhythm, a sense of flow, or a history of training; movement that does not feel personally gratifying) based on the 6-minute rhythmic dance established by Cathy. Fiona performs centerstage.

Fra, Fi, Chas: like three matches extinguished, movement stops.

Chas: restart and exit performing smartly executed movement.

Fi, Fra: proceed to the next location, performing instances of weightless, lyrical, spiraling movements not unlike smoke, but not like it, either. Softly hum an intermittent spontaneous love song.

Ca: As Frank reaches stage right, step onstage and embrace him.

Fi: Simultaneous with the embrace, become still.
Note: the embrace upstage and Fiona’s single figure downstage are, as if captured by a long pause.

Ca, Fra: simultaneously break into a traveling movement dialogue, with and without physical contact, and a quietly spoken, untranslatable substitute for a real conversation, with silences.

Fi: Simultaneously follow a curved path upstage, inspired by the sounds from the duet.

Chas: step onstage to form a diagonal line with the others.

Chas, Fi, Fra, Ca: take one step left.

Blackout

Fra, Ca, Fi, Chas: in the dark take one step right.

Lights

Ca, Chas, Fra, Fi: perform individual movements, best described as deliberately inconsequential, in close range to one another, eventually recombining into a set formation. Check to see that everyone ends facing the same direction.

Fi, Fra, Chas, Ca: head turns to look stage left. Produce two different sounds although they cannot be verified as such – first, a golf crowd’s affirmation, as heard on television, humming group approval: followed by its applause, recreated by smacking the tongue and lips together.

Ca, Chas, Fra, Fi: bend over or somehow lower by half, moving quickly, with deliberate inconsequentiality, maintaining a messy cluster. Produce a sporadic thwack from a pair of hands meeting, without clapping. New positions are taken.

Chas, Fra, Fi, Ca: straighten up, check for identical facing, and turn head stage left. Long pause.

Chas, Fra, Fi, Ca: television golf sounds repeat.

Ca, Fi, Chas, Fra: cross stage, in one of four roles:
1) a scientist busy at work in the lab
2) the lab
3) someone who undoes the scientist’s work
4) one who oversees the whole shebang
End in another preset arrangement.

Chas, Ca, Fi, Fra: Heads turn stage left. Short pause. Produce an audible bastardization of the golf audience instructions.

Chas, Ca, Fi, Fra: follow a curved path upstage, pulled by unrecognizable magnetic forces.

Ca, Fi, Fra, Chas: choose the sequence for performing three movements:
1) the right lower arm drops quickly, like an axe,
2) slavishly turn backward and around, and,
3) without paralleling either #1 or #2, produce a “fffft”, by compressing and widening the lips, and using the tongue to catapult the breath out between the front teeth. Restore the mouth quickly so that the sound’s source is unseen.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: Four spontaneous, individual, rhythmic combinations of snappily executed steps and jumps repeats and travels along a curved path. Side by side, face inside the curve. Then, fall into a void.

Fi, Chas, Ca, Fra: retrace path, repeating the same rhythmic combination as before, but face the convex plane of the curve. (The audible rhythmic counterpoint among the four separate combinations is music. )

Ca, Fi, Chas, Fra: disperse by continuing but distorting the former rhythm and movement.

Fra, Ca, Fi, Chas: choose sequence to perform three movements:
- the right arm, bent at the elbow, pokes forward in space
- one slavish turn backward and around, and,
- produce without paralleling either #1 or #2, a “fffft”, by compressing and widening the lips, and using the tongue to catapult the breath out between the front teeth. Restore the mouth quickly so the sound’s source is unseen.

Fra, Fi, Ca, Chas: rather weightless and with little impulse, perform the same movement and rhythm on tippy-toe, drawing stage right to a new set place. Add voice, in a corresponding, complex, non-translatable whisper, to accompany the elevated footsteps.

Ca, Fi: produce inconsistently two different single syllable sound(s), or word(s), inspired by a cheer heard at a boxing, tennis, or some other kind of match. Enthusiastically gesture, intermittently. Volume gradually diminishes.

Fra, Chas: run in place. No attention is given to the cheering.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: all action ceases. Head lowers.
Several immediate choices are made and remade:
a) an exhale matches the force of an inhale as a pair of facing palms exhibit excitement;
b) facing hands raise incrementally, sometimes together or separately;
c) use odd quick travel to move the action through space;
d) seemingly important little matches are made.

Chas, Ca, Fi, Fra: Before hands are fully overhead, click fingers, rock body sensually, enjoyably, commandingly, jazzily. (Practice keeps this from schlock)

Ca, Fi, Fra, Chas: Form a line downstage in front of the audience and break into the all-American high school chanting beat, 1-2-3, 1-2-3, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7, etc. Spontaneously verbalize as single syllable utterances that cheer each other and the audience. Physically charge the chanting.

Fi, Chas, Ca, Fra: move backwards upstage while the clarity of the single syllables transform into gobbilygook.

Ca, Fi, Fra: one softly spoken linear sentence is cut short with the sound, “tcct”, (short for “tic”), and a spontaneous, brief, highly stylized dance. Each “tcct” starts a new dance, dynamically matching the preceding one but stylistically different from “tcct” to “tcct”. Each little dance is a uniquely theatrical self meeting the moment. Exit individually.

Chas: perform only one “tcct” before a unique series of highly theatrical transformations, the duration of which is original, unique, and quintessentially contained.

Ca, Fi, Fra: (Offstage, turn away from the stage).

Chas: produce an incantation, not a plea, to draw Ca, Fi, and Fra, back to stage.

Ca, Fi, Fra: Appear at the edge of the stage, the head is the primary body part that bends, cocks, rolls, twists, and turns.

Chas: exit incanting.

Fra, Fi, Ca: travel, in random order - lift one knee hip high in front of the body, then the other. Arms are outstretched.

Fra, Ca, or Fra, Fi, or Fi, Ca: individually, in one swoop, bend forward, knees bent, say “fffft”. Simultaneously, one and then the other hand stack about two feet from and facing the floor. Arms and body rise incrementally, as a unit, with and sometimes without saying “ffft”.

Fi, or Ca, or Fra: exit performing knee lifts.

Fra, Ca, or Fra, Fi, or Fi, Ca: (continued): hands are almost overhead before pressing back down to the floor. Follow, original and unique, rolling over a few times, like imagined stop-frame photography.

Fi, or Ca, or Fra, plus Chas: return to stage rolling like imagined stop-frame photography.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: reverse rolling direction to spiral up into an airplane stance; arms spread to the sides, one leg bent in front of the body and the other extended behind. Banking is possible.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: in a subdued throaty voice speak and simultaneously retract unintelligible remarks. Intersperse with silence and an occasional single quiet note combining a high and low tone.
Note: The Match hypothesizes the possible with the impossible.

Fra, Fi, Chas: Individually shift from the airplane into a single gesture made in relation to the others. Sustain voices.

Ca: remain in the airplane.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: stand tall, by making incremental adjustments performed in ordinary time. Sound continues.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: eyes shut.

Fra, Fi, Chas, Ca: ridiculously illustrative, combine voice, movement, locomotion, and attitude to spontaneously ennact a spunky, child’s toy i.e. a jack-in-the-box – a theme-and-variation combining humor, joy, corn, idiocy, and even embarrassment. Repeat again and again - a challenge to self-esteem.

Fra, Chas, Ca: exit as toy.

Fi: continue until toy breaks down, or explodes, or deconstructs, or loses steam, or malfunctions, or transforms, or stops, whatever.

Fra, Ca, Chas: crawl into view thus determining the conclusion of Fi’s solo.
Note: this is a challenging choice, not a solicitous one.

Fi: exit and reappear instantly, crawling.

Fi, Ca, Chas, Fra: Crawl anywhere and/or stop, and/or sit leaning into a hip.

Fra: stand up and perform matching nothing with everything.

Ca, Chas, Fi: do not look at Fra.

Fra: just for a moment, salute the audience.

The lights go out