My Body, the Buddhist. Wesleyan University Press, October 2000.

Introduction.
Alone in candlelight one evening several years ago I made a list of the most valued teachings learned from my teacher, my body. I wanted to itemize, to see a written account of the practical wisdom I have discovered while experimenting with my teacher as guide. Each of the eighteen lessons is a chapter title in My Body, The Buddhist .

When the inventory was complete it spanned twenty-six years. I also noticed a parallel with Buddhist thought, although I am not a practicing Buddhist. For as long as I can remember there has been a soft spot in my heart for Buddhism. Non-resistance, seen in the bodies of many Buddhists, always had much in it to draw my attention. Even as a child, I appreciated the politics of non-violence. And action, through non-action, at least as I perceived it on the surface, was secretly attractive given my middle class upbringing.

In the early 1970's, when I was living at Mad Brook Farm in Vermont, the books I was reading, in particular, Be Here Now by Baba Ram Dass, and Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism by Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, advocated a spiritual path that was analogous to my experiences dancing. I was inspired to construct a verbal dance vocabulary that merged personal and universal images. I wanted it to include the sensual experiences of perception. With the help of language, I wanted to simplify access to dancing while expanding the territory from which a dancer could draw immediate kinesthetic experience.

The proliferation of books and articles concerning Buddhist philosophy may equal the number written about the body. Yet I am certain that no two people in western culture would define in the same way either body or Buddhism. How we describe the body even changes several times a day for some of us. I have come to understand that the body's form and content are not what they appear to be - my dances are not about any one thing.

" ...once you have that experience of the presence of life, don't hang onto it. Just touch and go. Touch that presence of life being lived, then go. You do not have to ignore it. "Go" does not mean that we have to turn our back on the experience and shut ourselves off from it; it means just being in it without further analysis and without further reinforcement. Holding onto life, or trying to reassure oneself that it is so, has the sense of death rather than life. "
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, The Heart of the Buddha, Shambala, 1991

My Body, as in the title of the manuscript, refers to a prescribed set of conditions organized around my work as a practicing performer, choreographer, and teacher. These imagined conditions, changed periodically, are necessary for me to even begin dancing.

"There has to be a certain discipline so that we are neither lost in daydream nor missing the freshness and openness that come from not holding our attention too tightly. This balance is a state of wakefulness, mindfulness."
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, The Heart of the Buddha, Shambala, 1991

My Body, dancing, is formed and sustained imaginatively. I re-configure the three-dimensional body into an immeasurable fifty-three trillions cells perceived perceiving, all of them, at once. Impossibly whole and ridiculous to presume, I remain, in awe of the feedback. At such times Deborah Hay assumes the devotion of a dog to its master; reading the simplest signs of life, noticing every nuance my teacher produces. When the greater part of the Buddhist world find its strength, solace, and wisdom through a practiced devotion to a guru, or Rinpoche, please imagine my hesitancy in admitting to twenty-eight years of devotion to an imagined 53-trillion-celled teacher.

My Body is unfixed. Its boundaries extend to the limits of what is visible and not visible in my practice of seeing. A field of unlimited resources is deliberately imagined because by participating in such an environment I cannot preconceive My Body's experience of the moment. My Body is deliberately not a collector.

The book's form grew from the list of chapter headings described in the first paragraph of the Introduction. I did not write the material to fit the chapter heading. I wrote the text to get a clearer picture, a wider perspective on how dancing impacts my life and how my life impacts my dance. When a story was complete, I would go through the list until an unusually obvious or unusually subtle link to a chapter heading was made. Either way, the parallel became more experiential than didactic.

My Body, The Buddhist is the work of dancer/choreographer, not schooled in theory, analysis, poetry, or criticism. I study riddles that disclose themselves when I am dancing - one every few years. Dance is the field trip I conduct in search of understanding a riddle. The manner in which jokes, riddles or games can thrill and annihilate the body's reasoning process with so much self-reflection, is similar to the experience of beginner's mind in Zen Buddhism.

It would have been antithetical to my process of inquiry to research Buddhist theory in order to substantiate my thesis. Long ago I stopped sitting at a desk, surrounded by books, gathering information. My research happens in the experiential realm dancing - standing on my two feet and moving, listening, seeing. I do not think people are going to be reading this text in order to learn about Buddhism.

I am not a practicing Buddhist. Nor am I a practiced poet, librettist, or archivist. The literary forms used in this book are liberties I have taken in order to unravel the coding between movement and perception. The libretto, poem, score, short story, were co-opted by a flag-bearer in pursuit of the study, transmission, and intelligence born in the dancing body. I will try anything to help bring some attention to the truth born here.

My Body, The Buddhist describes innate skills and basic wisdom that bodies possess but which remain untranslated because as a culture we tend to hide in our clothes. Unrecognized is the altar that rises with us in the morning and leads us to rest at night. The book's intent is to open some trapped doors that prevent awareness of the body's daringly ordinary perspicacity.

Eighteen artists, of varied disciplines, were invited to illustrate a chapter heading with either a drawing, photo, or up to a paragraph of text. None of them knew the chapter content beforehand. It was positively uncanny to observe how the submissions received corresponded to the content in the chapter heading they chose. The result of their collective participation led me to believe that My Body, The Buddhist could as well have been titled My Body, The Artist. I find this parallel very interesting.

Deborah Hay, Whidbey Island, 1998 

Performance as Practice

The performance practice for Whizz is "What if every cell in the body has the potential to distinguish loyalty and disinterestedness (in the loyalty), at once?" Most dancers have an intimate knowledge of loyalty in their relationship to the dance being performed. But the choreography of Whizz is structured to undermine attachment to that kind of loyalty. This is where disinterestedness enters the picture. "What if disinterestedness repositions the frame so that the dancer's loyalty is to the moment rather than to the dancing?" In this way, both loyalty and disinterestedness should govern the performance of Whizz.

I recently devised a baby, button, and stick analogy to help conceptualize how my performance practices work. Imagine observing a baby who is strong enough to sit up. Baby picks up a button and almost immediately the button finds its way to Baby's mouth. Baby either spits it out, chokes on the button, or swallows it. What we see is spontaneous, visceral, and predictable. Baby and the button symbolize "being" in the moment. When the button is put in the mouth it disappears from sight and becomes an invisible part of Baby. We see Baby.

The Zen approach to life tells us that "being" in the moment is not necessarily a great thing however it is all there is. Performance as a practice suggests to me that there can be more to the moment than just "being" in it.

Imagine now that Baby picks up a little brown stick. Baby moves it erratically through the air. There is no clue to the path or movement of the stick. Baby touches, pokes, bites, frames, waves, points, or drops the stick. The stick can always be picked up again. Options abound. Baby and the stick symbolize an extension of the self - territory gained, pliable, and visible. The observer notices a greater totality to the world of Baby, beyond its "being."

The nature of my performance practice is analogous to the baby's handling of a stick, but in its place I hold a linear thought, postulated as a self-perpetuating question. Within this construct, the self extends through that linear thought with the purpose of noticing possible worlds beyond the physical choreography of a dance. The question stimulates the body's curiosity and responsiveness. The dancer is thus decentralized and continuously repositioned in relation to time, space, and other.

I feel instant gratification when guided by a practice while performing choreography. This feeling reflects the psychology of the American consumer tradition. I am rewarded with an immediate sense of self-renewal, cohesion, accretion, and good conduct. I am reassured by the rules prescribed by the choreographer that includes my power to direct the flow of time. Like the consumer in a market, I am aware of my limits: how much pressure can I apply to that direction without irrevocably damaging the whole process? The limitations are the hot spot of perceptual activity, where the fieriest experimentation can be practiced.

I was invited to choreograph a dance, Whizz, for Mikhail Baryshnikov and the six-member White Oak Dance Project. I also choreographed Single Duet for Misha and myself. The opportunity to work with such sophisticated, versatile, and intelligent dancers was an exceptional privilege. I toured with them for six weeks in the Fall, 2000, guest teaching, talking to the public, and dancing with Misha in Single Duet. I also watched nearly every performance of Whizz and copied notes to give the company members afterwards. My observations were primarily directed to how they were performing the practice for Whizz, and not how they were doing the movements. Their practice determined their perceptual field, and from my perspective it was the most interesting element to observe on stage. The purpose of my feedback was ultimately to show how the inclusion of a performance practice could help loosen the tyranny of the myth of the dancer as a single coherent being - a basic element in dance training in the west. The effects of this idea can best be observed in the photographs in New York's Dance Magazine, where images of erectile dancers follow one another, page after page. My vision of the dancer, through the intervention of performance as a practice, is as a conscious flow of multiple perceptual occurrences unfolding continuously.

I contrasted Whizz with Lucinda Child's Concerto, another dance in the PastForward repertory. I had watched the company perform Concerto for six weeks, from the wings or from the house. I can still hear myself thinking, "Why am I so fascinated?" What follows are some of the notes I recently sent to the dancers.

The five strongest elements of Concerto are:
1. a tightly designed choreographic grid that punctuates its formal rigor;
2. its appeal to our desire to turn musical sensibility into a visual analogue-in this case, the power of Henryk Gorecki's ferociously driven Concerto for Harpsichord and Strings that sets the dancers in motion;
3. the choreographic balance between a strong visual geometry and the assertiveness of its persistence in motion;
4. its choreographed physicality expressing a classical, transcendent model rooted in traditional dance training;
5. and its ability to share with the audience a sense of clearly established tasks leading to the accomplishment of definite goals-through its dramatic display of speed, repetition and endurance.
By contrast, the five strongest elements of Whizz are:
1. a structure that erases causality;
2 . the independence of the dancer's physicality from the electronic music score, Alvin Lucier's Clockers;
3. an instantaneous and collaborative interplay of time and space that is the primary force in determining any given performance of Whizz, rather than the three dimensional body's preeminence in the choreographic design;
4. the dancer's spontaneously determined response to the moment, which suspends the viewer's attention and brings a sense of vulnerability to the performance;
5. and, a feeling of unity which is not modeled on any narrative, or visual cohesiveness and thus resists interpretation.

Concerto's complex and subtle template requires a sense of mastery (and loyalty) and thus a precise execution of its movements is needed for its' implied narrative to unfold. Whizz's progression is unforeseeable and the dancer is not the embodiment of a pre-existing design, but rather the author of a multiplicity of instances within the choreographic structure. Consequently each dancer's ability to manifest this, suggests his or her own music, alongside the electronic score.

My work can be traced in the questions it poses and the answers it rejects. What if performer and audience could learn to distinguish milliseconds of movement? Would that help us to realize the past and the future in the present? Would that then provide a more substantial role for the performer and the audience in the experience of dance? And, what if there are no answers to turn into history?

Introductory notes to A Lecture on the Performance of Beauty

I choreographed a solo dance, O Beautiful, in Spring 2002.

In December 2002 I hired a costume designer for O Beautiful and suggested the costume have a post–apocalyptic look .

In February 2003, after several performances, I decide not to perform O Beautiful in that costume anymore because of its influence over my dancing.

I continue a daily practice of O Beautiful through spring 2003. It becomes Beauty. I find a nice pale blue linen costume.

One day in late spring, I take off my clothes in the studio because it is very hot. I like the feeling of performing Beauty nude. It feels like the right costume for the dance.

I bring the blue linen outfit with me to London in June 2003. This way I have a choice to perform Beauty nude, or not, depending on how I feel in relation to the audience. At my age, it is not as if I want to perform without any clothes. The first dance on the program is my 40-minute solo Music. The audience is extremely receptive. After intermission, I step onstage in my pale blue costume, and ask for a volunteer from the audience. I whisper my wish that we walk upstage and that she is to undress me before returning to her seat. I hold that performance of Beauty perfect and complete.

How do I recognize my choreography?

The Solo Performance Commissioning Project began in 1998 at the Whidbey Island Center for the Arts, in the town of Langley, WA. It took place for ten days annually for five summers before it was relocated to the Findhorn Foundation Community in Scotland in 2004 where it has since been administered by Gill Clarke and staff from Independent Dance in London and by Karl Jay-Lewin of Bodysurf Scotland, at Findhorn.

Of the eight SPCPs that have taken place, about 140 solo adaptations have been realized. I have been an audience member at only a few public performances. It is at these public showings, however, that I am coming to learn what
xxxxChoreography: Deborah Hay
xxxxAdaptation and Performance: [example: Lindsay Doe]
means. This is how the credits appear when an adaptation is being performed.

What I mean by my choreography includes the transmission from me to the dancer, of the same set of questions I ask myself when I am performing a particular movement sequence that ministers shape to a dance. I will not talk about my movement choices here, except to say that as an aspect of my choreography they fall almost exclusively into three categories: 1) impossible to realize, 2) embarrassing to “do”, or, idiotic to contemplate, 3) maddeningly simple. These movement directions are not unlike my questions that are 1) unanswerable, 2) impossible to truly comprehend, and, at the same time, 3) poignantly immediate.

History choreographs all of us, including dancers. The choreographed body dominates most dancing, for better or for worse. The questions that guide me through a dance are like the tools one would use for renovating an already existing house. Like a screwdriver being turned counter-clockwise, or a crow bar prying boards free from a wall, the dancer applies the questions to re-choreograph his/her perceived relationship to him/herself, the audience, space, time, and the instantaneous awareness of any of these combined experiences. The questions help uproot behavior that gathers experimentally and/or experientially.

When I see a singularly coherent choreographed body, performing a solo adaptation, I know that the dancer is not choosing to exercise the re-measuring tools needed to counter-choreograph the predominance of learned behavior. I use the words “choosing to exercise” because most of us know exactly what is required when we choose to train the physical body to adapt to a choreographer’s aesthetics. Training oneself in a questioning process that counter-choreographs the learned body requires similar devotion and constancy.

Every dancer who learns one of my solo dances, signs a contract, committing to a minimum three months of practice before the first public performance of his/her solo adaptation. Three months is not an estimate. It is based on my experience with new material. In order to recognize all the ways I hold onto ideas, images, suppositions, beliefs, the ways my body attaches to what I think the material ‘is’, or should feel like, or look, I need to be alone in a studio, noticing the infinitely momentary feedback that arises from my daily performance of a reliable sequence of movement directions, influenced by the immediacy arising from the same questions day after day after day.

I recognize my choreography when I see a dancer’s self-regulated transcendence of his/her choreographed body within in a movement sequence that distinguishes one dance from another.
